📝 Gatsby to TinaCMS  - New guide (#2372)
tinacms/tina.io: content/docs/guides/converting-gatsby-to-tina.mdx

---
title: Converting an existing Gatsby project to TinaCMS
last_edited: '2024-10-25T08:29:23.867Z'
next: content/docs/cli-overview.mdx
previous: content/docs/contextual-editing/overview.mdx
---

> > ⚠️ Warning: TinaCMS does not officially support Gatsby. We recommend migrating your Gatsby site to a well supported framework such as [Next.JS](https://tina.io/docs/frameworks/next/overview/) instead.

Reviewer: We have a warning embed/template (`WarningCallout`) – you could use that instead :)

Reviewer 2: Done - I'm using that component now

## Introduction

In this tutorial we'll be showing you how you might go about converting an existing gatsby-mdx blog to use TinaCMS. We've created a starter repo for you to follow along with. The repo is a fork of the official [Gatsby md blog starter](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/starters/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-blog).

## Limitations

There are a few limitations with the approach outlined in this guide.

- You don't get visual editing
- You lose out in Gatsby's image optimization

> - Gatsby uses Github Flavoured Markdown, which TinaCMS doesn't fully support

Reviewer 2: Ok, I'll commit this. But only because TinaCMS is probably geared towards American clients.

Also what's the rationale behind changing `doesn't` to `does not`? I thought we were trying to make the guide less verbose.

## Getting started

> First you'll want to make sure you have the correct version of node installed. We'll be using the node version specified in the repo's `.nvmrc` file, v20.12.0. You can run the code below to make sure you have the correct version installed.

Reviewer: Don't specify the node version, as if this isn't touched in a while it'll make the docs look old.

Reviewer 2: Done I removed the section about installing node

```powershell
node --version
```

> Once you've made sure you have the right version of node installed, clone the project. Then navigate into the blog's directory.

Reviewer 2: I removed the part about installing node as per @isaaclombardssw's comment

```powershell
git clone https://github.com/tinacms/gatsby-mdx-example-blog
cd gatsby-mdx-example-blog
```

## Adding Tina

Awesome! You're all set up and ready start adding TinaCMS. You can initialize it using the command below.

```powershell
npx @tinacms/cli@latest init
```

After running the command above you'll receive a few propmts

1. When prompted to select a framework select `“other”`
2. Choose `“NPM”` as your package manager
3. When asked if you'd like to use Typescript choose `“no”`

> 4. Set the public assets location to `“public”`

Reviewer 2: Not sure if I like this phrasing, the prompt doesn't say to choose NPM, it asks to select your preferred package manager

## Setting up Gatsby for Tina

Now that we've added Tina to our project there's a few more steps we need to do to get Tina working with Gatsby. Add the following line at the top of `tina/config.js`

```diff
export default defineConfig({
+  client: { skip: true },
// ...
```

> Then add the following line in `gatsby-node.js`

Reviewer 2: Committed

```diff
+ const express = require("express");
+ exports.onCreateDevServer = ({ app }) => {
+   app.use("/admin", express.static("public/admin"));
+ };
```

> To save ourself some pain we can also change our startup command to make sure Tina gets run when we run our app in development mode.

Reviewer 2: Committed 👍

```diff
  "scripts": {
    "build": "gatsby build",
-   "develop": "gatsby develop",
+   "develop": "npx tinacms dev -c \"gatsby develop\"",
    "format": "prettier --write \"**/*.{js,jsx,ts,tsx,json,md}\"",
    "start": "gatsby develop",
    "serve": "gatsby serve",
    "clean": "gatsby clean",
    "test": "echo \"Write tests! -> https://gatsby.dev/unit-testing\" && exit 1"
  }
```

## Configuring our Schema

> Now we've added Tina to our project but it's not pointing at our existing markdown files **(Oh noes!)**. Let fix that. Open up `tina/config.ts` and change the path to point to our blog directory. We'll also need to update our schema since we'll be working with mdx files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we've added Tina to our project but it's not pointing at our existing markdown files. Let fix that. 

Open up `tina/config.ts` and change the path to point to our blog directory. We'll also need to update our schema since we'll be working with mdx files.
```

Split up the paragraph and remove the oh no I reckon 😆

Reviewer 2: Committed 👍

```diff
schema: {
  collections: [
    {
      name: "post",
      label: "Posts",
+     format: "mdx",
-     path: "content/posts"
+     path: content/blog"
// ...
```

> We'll also need to change the location where images get uploaded to. Since `"public"` doesn't get tracked in Git.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if I agree with this suggestion. 
The note beneath this step already clarifies this: 
> > By moving our images to \`"static"\`, we're ensuring that they'll be tracked in git and bundled at run time.

> > By moving our images to \`"static"\`, we're ensuring that they'll be tracked in git and bundled at run time.

Reviewer 2: I think so, I like to explain why we're making changes along the way. I think it helps the reader understand what they're doing so that they can troubleshoot later on.

```diff
export default defineConfig({
  branch,

  client: { skip: true },

  // Get this from tina.io
  clientId: process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_TINA_CLIENT_ID,
  // Get this from tina.io
  token: process.env.TINA_TOKEN,

  build: {
    outputFolder: "admin",
    publicFolder: "public",
  },
  media: {
    tina: {
-     mediaRoot: "",
+     mediaRoot: "images",
-     publicFolder: "public",
+     publicFolder: "static",

    },
// ...
```

## Setting up TinaMarkdown

> Now our project is set up to use TinaCMS. There's a problem though: our project is still using Gatsby's mdx parser instead of TinaCMS's. We'll need to to a bit of tweaking to get it working. First we'll edit the graphql query inside of `gatsby-node.js` so that it returns the raw markdown.

Reviewer: "to to"?
```suggestion
Now our project is set up to use TinaCMS. There's a problem though: our project is still using Gatsby's mdx parser instead of TinaCMS's. We'll need to do a bit of tweaking to get it working. First we'll edit the graphql query inside of `gatsby-node.js` so that it returns the raw markdown.
```

Reviewer 2: was rephrased to

> With the project set up to use TinaCMS, we still need to switch from Gatsby’s MDX parser to TinaCMS’s. Begin by modifying the GraphQL query in gatsby-node.js to return raw markdown:

> Now our project is set up to use TinaCMS. There's a problem though: our project is still using Gatsby's mdx parser instead of TinaCMS's. We'll need to to a bit of tweaking to get it working. First we'll edit the graphql query inside of `gatsby-node.js` so that it returns the raw markdown.

Reviewer 2: Can't commit because these changes are outdated, but did it here.

https://github.com/tinacms/tina.io/pull/2372/commits/ecb6a3f78a331db3f53ec987d961e49a339bfeb5

```diff
  const result = await graphql(`
    {
      allMdx(sort: { frontmatter: { date: ASC } }, limit: 1000) {
        nodes {
          Id
+         body
// ...
```

> Using the raw markdown from `body` we can generate a custom node that contains the markdown in a format that TinaCMS can read. First We'll import TinaCMS's markdown parser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the raw markdown from `body` we can generate a custom node that contains the markdown in a format that TinaCMS can read. 

To do this, we'll import TinaCMS's markdown parser.
```

Reviewer 2: Done - committed

> Using the raw markdown from `body` we can generate a custom node that contains the markdown in a format that TinaCMS can read. First We'll import TinaCMS's markdown parser.
> Add this import to the top of `gatsby-node.js`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the raw markdown from `body` to create a custom node in Tina's format. 
Import TinaCMS's markdown parser at the top of `gatsby-node.js`:
```

Reviewer 2: Can't commit because these changes are outdated, but did it here.

https://github.com/tinacms/tina.io/pull/2372/commits/ecb6a3f78a331db3f53ec987d961e49a339bfeb5

Reviewer 2: No longer relevant, I removed this line

```diff
+ const { parseMDX } = require("@tinacms/dist")
```

> Then inside of `onCreateNode` we'll create a new node containing an Abstract Syntax Tree we can pass into our TinaMarkdown component. We'll also need to serialize the result as a string so that we can return it as a single value from our page query.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Inside `onCreateNode`, create a new node with an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) compatible with TinaMarkdown. Serialize the AST as a string for easy retrieval in your page query.
```

Reviewer 2: ```diff
Inside `onCreateNode`, create a new node with an [Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)](https://tina.io/docs/editing/markdown/#rendering-content-with-tinamarkdown) compatible with TinaMarkdown. Then we'll serialize it a string for easy retrieval in your page query.
```

> Then inside of `onCreateNode` we'll create a new node containing an Abstract Syntax Tree we can pass into our TinaMarkdown component. We'll also need to serialize the result as a string so that we can return it as a single value from our page query.

Reviewer: If this is the first mention of the AST, link to a docs page on it (I think there are some).

Reviewer 2: Done - I added a link to the tina markdown docs which mentions AST trees

https://tina.io/docs/editing/markdown/#rendering-content-with-tinamarkdown

```diff
+ const imageCallback = url => {
+   return url.replace(/^\./, "/images")
+ }
exports.onCreateNode = ({ node, actions, getNode }) => {
  const { createNodeField } = actions
  if (node.internal.type === `Mdx`) {
    const value = createFilePath({ node, getNode })
    createNodeField({
      name: `tinaMarkdown`,
      node,
      value: JSON.stringify(
        parseMDX(
          node.body,
+          {
+           type: "rich-text",
+           name: "body",
+           label: "Body",
+           isBody: true,
+           },
+           imageCallback
        )
      ),
    })
// ...
```

Now that we've defined our new custom node we should be ready to use it in our graphql query. Open `src/templates/blog-post.js` and add our custom node to the page query.

```
export const pageQuery = graphql`
  query BlogPostBySlug(
    $id: String!
    $previousPostId: String
    $nextPostId: String
  ) {
    site {
      siteMetadata {
        title
      }
    }
    mdx(id: { eq: $id }) {
      id
+     fields {
+       tinaMarkdown
+     }
// ...
`
```

> Now we're ready to parse the formatted markdown into our component. We'll also remove the `"children"` prop which normally contains the HTML from Gatsby's mdx parser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we're ready to parse the formatted markdown into our component. We'll also remove the `children` prop which normally contains the HTML from Gatsby's mdx parser.
```
Don't need the quotes as well as monospace.

Reviewer 2: Done - rephrased all nested quotes to use monospace

```diff
const BlogPostTemplate = ({
  data: { previous, next, site, mdx: post },
  location,
- children,
}) => {
  const siteTitle = site.siteMetadata?.title || `Title`
+ const tinaMarkdownContent = JSON.parse(post.fields.tinaMarkdown)
  return (
    <Layout location={location} title={siteTitle}>
      <article
        className="blog-post"
        itemScope
        itemType="http://schema.org/Article"
      >
        <header>
          <h1 itemProp="headline">{post.frontmatter.title}</h1>
          <p>{post.frontmatter.date}</p>
        </header>
-         {children}
+         <TinaMarkdown content={tinaMarkdownContent} />
        <hr />
  // ...
  )
}
```

Unfortunately, we'll need to move images to our media directory to have them appear on our pages. In this case there's only one image

```powershell

> cp ./content/blog/hello-world/salty_egg.jpg static/images/salty_egg.jpg

Reviewer 3: Not sure how to make this clearer but I think we should re-word this part as well

Reviewer 2: 1. Let me know if you agree with this phrasing

> Tina doesn't currently support the relative image urls used by Gatsby, so we'll need to move our images to the media directory we defined earlier.

2. Should I link the spike regarding this issue? https://github.com/tinacms/tinacms/issues/5172

Reviewer 3: > 1. 

A lot better! 

> 2. 
Possibly.... wouldn't hurt and we could see if people want it 🚀

```

We'll also need to update all of the lists to be the same format in `content/blog/hello-world/index.md`

> > You may need to update other elements on your own website. For a list of unsupported markdown elements for Tina see [our guide](https://tina.io/docs/reference/types/rich-text/?#unsupported-elements).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Note: You may need to update other elements on your site. For unsupported markdown elements in Tina, refer to [our guide](https://tina.io/docs/reference/types/rich-text/?#unsupported-elements).
```

Reviewer 2: Committed 👍

````diff
- - Red
+ * Red

- - Green
+ * Green

- - Blue
+ * Blue

* Red

* Green

* Blue

- - Red
+ * Red

- - Green
+* Green

- - Blue
+* Blue

```markdown

+ * Red

- - Green
+ * Green

- - Blue
+ * Blue

* Red

* Green

* Blue

- - Red
+ * Red

- - Green
+* Green

- - Blue
+* Blue

```
````

> Now we should be able to read and edit our existing pages in Tina. We'll add some css to fix the images in our articles since they aren't being handled by to fix the width of our images since they're no longer being processed by gatsby. Add the following to the top of `src/style.css`. This will resize any images in our blog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we should be able to read and edit our existing pages in Tina. 

We'll add some css to fix the images in our articles since they aren't being handled by to fix the width of our images since they're no longer being processed by gatsby. 

Add the following to the top of `src/style.css`. This will resize any images in our blog.
```

> ```diff
> + img {
> +  max-width
> + }
> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```diff
+ img {
+   max-width: 100%;
+ }
```
```

Should this have a value?

Reviewer 2: Done - the max-width was supposed to be 130px so I added it there.

> Congratulations! You've set up a Gatsby MDX blog to use Tina. You can run `npm run develop` to test it out.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Congratulations! Your Gatsby MDX blog is now set up with Tina. Run `npm run develop` to test it out.
```

Reviewer 2: Committed 👍

## (Optional) Adding React components

> You can create React components in Gatsby as well, but you'll need to do some additional configuration compared to other frameworks. First, we'll modify the schema for our blog posts, defining the new React component we're planning to add.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create React components in Gatsby as well, but you'll need to do some additional configuration compared to other frameworks.

  First, we'll modify the schema for our blog posts, defining the new React component we're planning to add.
```

Reviewer 2: Done - Committed suggestion

        ],
      },
    ],
  },
```

Then we'll provide the new schema information to our MDX parser function, ensuring that it knows what to do when it encounters our custom element.

```diff
createNodeField({
    name: `tinaMarkdown`,
    node,
    value: JSON.stringify(
      parseMDX(
        node.body,
        {
          type: "rich-text",
          name: "body",
          label: "Body",
          isBody: true,
+          templates: [
+            {
+              name: "RichBlockQuote",
+              label: "Rich Block Quote",
+              fields: [
+                {
+                  name: "children",
+                  label: "Body",
+                  type: "rich-text",
+                },
+              ],
+            },
+          ],
        },
        imageCallback
      )
    ),
  })
```

Next, we'll define how the custom component will look in `blog-post.js`. We'll be parsing the child of the component into our TinaMarkdown renderer to give us rich text editing capabilities.

```diff
+ const components = {
+ RichBlockQuote: props => {
+ return (
+     <blockquote>
+       <TinaMarkdown content={props.children} />
+     </blockquote>
+     )
+   },
+ }
```

> Setting the body to the built-in `children` property in React allows us to use the children of our React component as a value. This has the added benefit of making our markdown easy to read. For example, check out the example below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting the body to the built-in `children` property in React allows us to use the children of our React component as a value. 

This has the added benefit of making our markdown easy to read. For example, check out the example below.
```

Reviewer 2: done - committed
